# Compute Rolling Upgrade Service (CRUS)

CRUS is the Shasta service that manages Compute Node Rolling Upgrades.
It provides a way to upgrade a set of compute nodes in discrete steps
(i.e. a few nodes at a time) gracefully, coordinating with Workload
Managers and with the Boot Orchestration Service (BOS) to take nodes
out of service, boot them and put them back into service while
minimally impacting the availabilty of nodes to do work under a
workload manager.

Further documentation of how to use CRUS can be found in the 'docs'
sub-directory here.

# Building

To build a docker image from the Compute Rolling Upgrade Service code:

```
$ docker build -t cray-crus .
```

This will build the code and create a docker image called
'cray-crus' tagged as latest.

# Running

CRUS can be run in 'testing' mode under Docker on any platform:

```
$ docker run -e CRUS_CONFIGURATION=testing -e ETCD_MOCK_CLIENT=yes -p <your favorite port>:8080 cray-crus
```

This will run the cray-crus service in a fully mocked environment in
which you can do simulated upgrades and watch them run to completion.
You can also run this code standalone on a Mac or Linux system (I
can't vouch for Windows as I have not tried it there) by creating a
virtual environment for cray-crus (see *Development* below),
installing cray crus in that environment (see *Development* below) and
running the following command while that virtual environment is
activated:

```
$ ETCD_MOCK_CLIENT=yes CRUS_CONFIGURATION=testing python -m crus.wsgi
```

# Unit Testing

Compute Rolling Upgrade uses nox to test the python code.  This will
check for lint errors and coding style violations, then run unit tests
and verify test coverage.  The tests will fail if there are lint issues,
coding style violations, test failures, or test coverage of less than
95%.

While the tests provide a leeway that allows for a 95% coverage to
pass, this project tries to maintain 100% coverage with judicious use
of coverage pragmas.  The principle here is that it is easier to
review code for test coverage issues if you can identify the code that
is not covered by looking for pragmas than by walking through the
coverage report.  Please try to maintain 100% coverage and try to
fully justify your use of pragmas before using them.  There are
several pragmas defined in .coveragerc that can be used and are
described there.

To run the tests, go to the top of the source tree and run:

```
$ nox
```

The tests are also run as part of the docker image build procedure and
will cause the docker image build to fail if it the tests do not pass
and reach 95% coverage.

Note that in addition to the tests, the code will be linted and style
checked and that no lint or style errors or warnings are permitted.

This same testing is done during the Docker build procedure used both
locally and by Jenkins.  This ensures both lint-free and working code
at Jenkins build time.

# Deploying to Hardware for Testing

CRUS is Helm based and deploys using Loftsman.  To deploy it, follow
the instructions found in
[The Ahoy! README](https://stash.us.cray.com/projects/CLOUD/repos/loftsman-ahoy/browse/README.md)
and the Ahoy! manual that is linked from there. Make sure you pay
attention to the "Getting Set Up" chapter (Chapter 2) and then use the
instructions in the "Ahoy! Exporting" chapter to get your chart
deployed on a system.

# Development

CRUS is intended to be developed in a Python virtual environment.  To
set up the virtual environment for development:

1. Create the virtual environment in the root of your cloned tree:
   ```
   $ virtualenv crus_env
   ```
2. Enter the virtual environment:
   ```
   $ . ./crus_env/bin/activate
   ```
3. Install the CRUS in your workspace virtual
   environment, which will pull in all dependencies.
   ```
   $ pip install --index-url=http://dst.us.cray.com/dstpiprepo/simple --trusted-host dst.us.cray.com .
   ```

## Important Note To Developers

The swagger specification for CRUS is contained in the code itself, so the
api/swagger.yaml file is generated by a pre-commit hook, not modified by hand.
Please make sure set the following in your repo to make this work:

```bash
>> git config --local core.hookspath .githooks/
```

In order for these hooks to work, you will need to be in a python
virtual environment with this directory installed.  To set that up,
create your virtual environment as described above and install CRUS
as described above.

When you do a commit, you will need to be in the virtual environment
or the commit will fail during swagger generation.
